# Homework 05

Deadline: Friday, May 28, 12:00

Put your Scala file(s) with the solutions in this repository.

## Task 1: Understanding boxes

In the following we consider FAE programs and BCFAE programs, with the
interpreter for BCFAE as defined in the [lecture notes](https://github.com/ps-tuebingen-courses/pl1-2021/blob/master/lecturenotes/10-bcfae.scala).

Consider the following two FAE programs:

```scala
val faeProgram1 =
  wth("fun", Fun("x", Add("x", 0)),
    Add(App("fun", 0), App("fun", 0)))
val faeProgram2 =
  wth("fun", Fun("x", Add("x", 0)),
    wth("x", App("fun", 0),
      Add("x", "x")))
```

In the following, two programs are equivalent if they evaluate to the same numerical value.

Answer the following questions:

- Are they equivalent?
- Do they necessarily stay equivalent if we replace the body of function
"fun" by another arbitrary FAE expression?

Now, consider the following two BCFAE programs:

```scala
val bcfaeProgram1 =
  wth("counter", NewBox(0),
    wth("fun", Fun("x", Add("x", 0)),
      Add(App("fun", 0), App("fun", 0))))
val bcfaeProgram2 =
  wth("counter", NewBox(0),
    wth("fun", Fun("x", Add("x", 0)),
      wth("x", App("fun", 0),
        Add("x", "x"))))
```

Answer the following questions:

- Are they equivalent?
- Do they necessarily stay equivalent if we replace the body of function
"fun" by another arbitrary FAE expression (that is, a BCFAE expression that
only uses the syntactic constructs available in FAE)?
- Do they necessarily stay equivalent if we replace the body of function
"fun" by another arbitrary BCFAE expression?

Hints:

- Try this out with the appropriate interpreter from the lecture notes.
- This question is about the relation between mutation and purity.
If we call the same function twice with the same argument, are we going to
always get the same result, or not?


## Task 2: Assignment to arbitrary variables

Add to the FAE language assignment to arbitrary variables (and not just to boxes),
similar to Java or C. The language should also support sequencing (like BCFAE).
Your implementation needs to ensure that the environment binds each variable to a
box, rather than directly to a value.

Hints:
- Start with the [code from the BCFAE interpreter](https://github.com/ps-tuebingen-courses/pl1-2021/blob/master/lecturenotes/10-bcfae.scala). Be sure to review it first.
- The syntax of assignment will be either:

```scala
case class Assign(lhs: String, rhs: Exp) extends Exp
```

or corresponding syntactic sugar, that, for instance, can be implemented in terms of `SetBox`.

```scala
def Assign(lhs: String, rhs: Exp): Exp = ...
```

- All variables bindings need to be boxes. To achieve this, you can either change the interpreter,
or redefine the constructs that bind variables.
- Try writing example programs, in both the language you implement and in Scala, and writing down
what they should evaluate to (in words and possibly with testcases).

Here are some possible examples:

```scala
val test1 = App(Fun("x", wth("y", 0, Seq(If0(OpenBox("x"), Assign("y", 4), Assign("y", 2)), Mul(OpenBox("y"), OpenBox("y"))))), 5)
val test2 = App(Fun("x", wth("y", 0, Seq(If0(OpenBox("x"), Assign("y", 4), Assign("y", 2)), Mul(OpenBox("y"), OpenBox("y"))))), 0)

assert(eval(test1, Map.empty, Map.empty)._1 == NumV(4))
assert(eval(test2, Map.empty, Map.empty)._1 == NumV(16))
```

In case you have trouble getting started on this task, try to solve it following these steps:
1. Start with the code for the BCFAE interpreter from the lecture.
2. Add `Assign` as syntactic sugar (`def Assign(...): Exp = ...`) using `SetBox`.
3. Change the `App` case in the interpreter (`eval`) such that the function parameter is bound to
an address pointing to the argument value rather than the value itself. Here is a little
hint on how you could do that:

```scala
eval(a, env, s1) match {
     case (av, s2) => {
       // Changed for the task
       val addr = nextAddress;
       eval(f.body, closureEnv + (f.param -> ...), s2 + ...)
     }
   }
```

Think about how to fill in the `...` to realize what is described above.
