# Homework 09

**Deadline: Friday, July 2, 12:00**

## Task 1: Transforming LetCC

Consider the abstract syntax for our language with first-class continuations,
containing the `Letcc` construct:
```scala
case class Letcc(param: Symbol, body: Exp) extends Exp
```

Certain programs using let/cc can be transformed, in a semantics preserving way
(upto the function wrapper for the outermost continuation `k => ...`, as usual for CPS),
into FAE programs by:

(1) using the CPS transformation and then (2) replacing `Letcc` with a function.

For instance, Racket's `(let/cc k (k 3))`, that is

```scala
val ex: Exp = Letcc("k", App("k", 3))
```
transforms to:
```scala
val exCps: Exp = Fun("k", App("k", 3))
```
We did not need to do a CPS transformation and directly used a function in place of the `Letcc`.

Now consider a term within which this let/cc term appears:
```scala
Mul(5, Letcc("k", App("k", 3)))
```
Here we can eliminate the let/cc by first CPS-transforming the entire term,
taking care of the let/cc later (we indicate this by the square brackets; the
bracketed expression can be thought of as a CPS-transformed version of `Letcc`
expecting the current continuation as an argument to bind it to `"k"`):
```scala
Fun("k0", App([Letcc("k", App("k", 3))], Fun("a", App("k0", Mul(5, "a")))))
```
We can finish the transformation by directly replacing the let/cc with a function (in the same way we did before):
```scala
Fun("k0", App(Fun("k", App("k", 3)), Fun("a", App("k0", Mul(5, "a")))))
```

Your tasks:

**Subtask 1**: Transform the examples below using the same approach:
1. `(+ 1 (let/cc k (k 3))`
2. `(+ (let/cc k (k 3)) 2)`
3. 
```
   (+ 3
      (let/cc k
        (let ([f
               (lambda (x) (+ 1 x))])
          (k (+
              (f 2)
              (f 5))))))
```

**Subtask 2**: Finally, what about terms like this:
```
(+ 1 (let/cc k 3))
```
Or this:
```
(+ 1 (let/cc k (+ (k 3) 2)))
```
How are they different from the other examples we saw so far?
Does our transformation approach still work on them? If not, why not?

## Task 2: Delimited continuations

For this task, you need to install DrRacket, which you can download [here](https://download.racket-lang.org/).
There are installers for macOS and Windows available, where you can just follow the instructions.
Once installed, start DrRacket. The window consists of a definition area (editor for Racket) and
an interaction area (a REPL) at the bottom. Paste the following program into the definition area:

```racket
#lang racket
(require racket/control)

(define (one-of l)
  (shift k
         (apply append (map (lambda (x) (k x)) l))))
         
(define (f l1 l2)
  (reset (list (+ (one-of l1) (one-of l2)))))

(f (list 1 2 3) (list 9 12 154))
```

Then click the "Start" button to evaluate the program.
You will see the following result in the interaction area:

```racket
'(10 13 155 11 14 156 12 15 157)
```

In Racket, this means the same as:

```racket
(list 10 13 155 11 14 156 12 15 157)
```

Note that the program uses delimited continuations in the form of the `shift` and `reset` constructs,
just like the ones we saw in the lecture.

Your tasks:

1. In your own words, describe what `f` computes. You can start with:
"Given inputs `l1` and `l2`, `f` computes a list containing ...".

2. Briefly explain why `f` behaves in the way you described.

Hints:
- Try to find out how the example call of `f` above is evaluated.
For this, recall what `shift` and `reset` do.
To get started, you can also try some other example inputs to `f` and compare.
- If you don't know what Racket's `apply` and `append` do you can look it up [here (apply)](https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/procedures.html#%28def._%28%28lib._racket%2Fprivate%2Fbase..rkt%29._apply%29%29) and [here (append)](https://docs.racket-lang.org/reference/pairs.html#%28def._%28%28quote._~23~25kernel%29._append%29%29).
